it may seem there's nothing exciting
about human bones
unless you find them in your closet
but normally they're hidden under
multiple layers of cells and tissues
they're dense hard and unassuming but
are they your bones not only protect
your internal organs
and help you move but also store fat and
minerals
your blood cells are produced there most
of the bone tissue isn't even solid
how about going on a journey through
your bones to see it with your own eyes
but you'll need to get through several
layers of other tissues first
to start with you'll have to squeeze
through the skin
your largest organ be careful it's a
labyrinth of hair follicles sweat glands
nerve
endings and blood vessels where you can
easily get lost
right under the skin there's a layer of
fat its main purpose is to keep your
body warm
this layer consists of tiny plastic bags
each with a drop of fat and you may have
a tough time
navigating around these bubbles after
passing this
obstacle course you're inside your
muscles their cells
fibrous and long are always ready to
spring into action
helping you transport your body wherever
you need
moving through this layer of tissue is
tricky because such
cells form bundles and that's what makes
your muscles so strong
imagine taking a bunch of rubber bands
and stretching them
hard your muscle tissue is tough like
that
finally you reach your destination and
see a thin
dense membrane it's the outer surface of
a bone
this layer consists mostly of connective
tissue made up of proteins
you also spot numerous blood vessels
their tiny perpendicular branches
sneak deeper into the bone to feed bone
cells
you notice that these branches lie in
minuscule channels
the inside of the surface layer is
filled with stem cells
they're the busiest in childhood and
become less active when a person grows
up
but if a bone is damaged they jump back
into action
and get down to repairing it luckily all
your bones are intact
but if there was a fracture you'd see
nearby vessels bleeding and forming a
thick lump around the injury
in about two days the area would be
surrounded by countless bone producing
cells
they would begin to change turning into
different kinds of cells and forming new
bone between the ends of the fractured
one
anyway it's time to move further toward
your bones hardest part
the outer layer which is smooth and
solid
because of its density it's also called
compact bone
this kind of bone is the reason why
x-rays which can normally pass through
nearly anything
including your body's soft tissues can
hardly get through your bones
this part makes up eighty percent of
your total bone mass it's incredibly
hard to squeeze through the compact bone
because it consists of numerous
microscopic columns
inside these cylinders there are even
more bone producing cells
and in the middle there's a central
canal that connects the bones nerve
fibers and blood vessels
the cylinders go along the bone and help
to prevent it from bending or fracturing
once you get through this super hard
layer the picture around changes
dramatically
you're in spongy bone boing boing true
to its name
it looks like a sponge or a honeycomb
that consists of tiny needles
this bone tissue is way less dense than
the compact bone
more flexible and also much lighter
you notice that the spongy tissue is
only near the ends of the bone you're
exploring
it means you're inside one of the long
bones whose structure is a bit different
from others
in the middle it has what looks like a
tunnel to you
it's made of compact bone that surrounds
a cavity filled with a special substance
it's called yellow bone marrow and it's
rich in fat
but it's time to return to the spongy
bone it's mostly found at the ends of
long bones
inside vertebrae and near joints this
sponge-like tissue has open spaces in it
they're filled with red bone marrow
which produces blood cells
while traveling further through the
human skeleton you discover that it
consists of five types of bones
long they're much longer than they are
wide for example
your thigh or upper arm bones and your
toes and fingers
flat they're thin and slightly curved
these bones are like a layered cake
spongy bone sandwiched between two
parallel layers of compact bone
your ribs and most of the bones in your
skull are flat bones
short bones shaped like cubes they
consist of a thin
layer of compact bone around spongy
insides
short bones can be found in your wrists
and ankles
sesamoid these are bones surrounded by
tendons
and their main purpose is to hold
tendons away from joints
there are numerous bones in your feet
hands and knees including the kneecap
these bones got such a name because they
look like grains of
wheat irregular bones these don't fit
into any category because their shape is
too complicated
those are most of the bones of your face
and some of your skull
an adult skeleton's made up of 206 bones
and each of them has its own function
interestingly
people are born with nearly twice as
many bones but as you grow up
these small bones fuse together and form
larger ones
as a person matures if one bone's broken
those around it can't work properly
either
it usually takes about 12 weeks for a
bone to heal
the smallest bone in your body is dozens
of times smaller than a penny
this bone is called the stapes and is
located in your middle ear
the tiny thing weighs as much as two
sesame seeds you get a new skeleton
every 10 years
because every year 10 percent of your
bones mineral content gets renewed
the average person walks one to three
million steps per year
as white bones have to be so resilient
otherwise they wouldn't cope with the
pressure
[Music]
your longest and strongest bone is in
your leg
the femur that's how it's called runs
from your hip to your knee
even though your teeth are part of the
skeletal system they don't count as
bones
more than half of all the bones in your
body are in your hands and feet
the only bone in your body that's not
connected to another
is the tongue bone it's a v-shaped bone
at the base of your tongue that holds it
in place
one percent of people are born with a
13th rib
your bones aren't white their colors
rather yellow or pinkish from the
outside
and deep red inside that's because of
the blood vessels
in and around them if you fracture a
bone
ow it'll heal on its own by producing
new bone cells
a cast will only help it heal straight
people have known how to deal with
broken bones for ages
in ancient egypt around 1600 years bce
they realigned fractured bones and
bandaged them with linen
now you can't control your bones you can
only tell your muscles
attached to your bones where to move
your bones reach their maximum density
at the age of 30.
only 10 percent of the world's animals
including humans
are vertebrates meaning they have a
skeletal system
a coating of special tissue called
cartilage covers a bone and prevents it
from rubbing directly against another
one
the enamel covering your teeth is even
stronger than your bones
it protects the delicate tissue and
nerves underneath
the biggest joint in your body is
actually your knee
it has to be large to connect three
equally big bones
the femur going from your hip to your
knee the kneecap
and the shin bone some joints hardly
move
or don't move whatsoever those are
between your teeth
inside the skull and between the first
pair of ribs bones or minerals
for example calcium and phosphate they
can be released in your bloodstream when
necessary
and finally the so-called funny bone
isn't a bone at
all it's a nerve that runs inside your
elbow
when you hit it you feel sharp piercing
pain
the upper arm bone the nerve runs by is
called the humerus
but the pain is clearly not humorous it
can be funny when it happens to someone
else